---
title: '`TelescopeML` -- I. An End-to-End Python Package for Interpreting Telescope Datasets through Training 
Machine Learning Models, Generating Statistical Reports, and Visualizing Results'
tags:
  - Python
  - Astronomy
  - Exoplanets
  - Brown dwarfs
  - Spectroscopy
  - Atmospheric retrieval
  - Atmospheric models
  - Machine learning
  - Convolutional Neural Network
  - Telescope datasets
authors:
  - name: Ehsan (Sam) Gharib-Nezhad
    orcid: 0000-0002-4088-7262
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Natasha E. Batalha
    orcid: 0000-0003-1240-6844 
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Hamed Valizadegan
    orcid: 0000-0001-6732-0840
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Miguel J. S. Martinho
    orcid: 0000-0002-2188-0807
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Gopal Nookula 
    orcid: (Ask Gopal to fix this!)
    affiliation: "5"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Science and Astrobiology Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, 94035 USA
    index: 1
  - name: Bay Area Environmental Research Institute, NASA Research Park, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Universities Space Research Association (USRA), Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
    index: 3
  - name: Intelligent Systems Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
    index: 4
  - name: (Hey Gopal- please complete this) University of California, Riverside
    index: 5

date: 01 November 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

aas-doi: LINK OF ApJ PAPER
aas-journal: The Astrophysical Journal 

--- 

# Statement of Need

We are on the verge of a revolutionary era in space exploration, thanks to advancements in ground- and space-based 
telescopes, such as the James Webb and CRIRES. These remarkable instruments collect an enormous amount of data 
from extrasolar atmospheres [e.g., @bean2018transiting]. Without an accurate interpretation of this data, the main objectives 
of space missions will not be fully accomplished. Different analytical and statistical methods, such as the chi-test and 
Bayesian statistics as well as radiative-transfer atmospheric modeling packages have been developed 
[e.g., @batalha2017pandexo; @batalha2019picaso; @MacDonald2023POSEIDON]
and are utilized in the context of forward- and retrieval-radiative transfer modeling to analyze these datasets and 
extract crucial information, such as atmospheric temperature, metallicity, carbon-to-oxygen ratio, and surface gravity 
[@line2014systematic; @Iyer2023Sphinx; @Marley2015]. These atmospheric models rely on the synthetic training 
datasets generated by simulating the physics and chemistry of these atmospheres for a wide range of thermal structures 
and compositions. In addition, machine learning and deep learning methods have been developed in recent years 
for various astronomical problems, including confirming the classification of light curves for 
exoplanet validation [e.g., @Valizadegan2021] as well as interpreting brown dwarfs spectra using Random Forest technique 
[e.g., @Lueber2023RandomForesr_BDs]. However, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time, deep learning and convolutional neural networks is implemented on brown dwarf 
atmospheric datasets to predict parameters such as temperature and gravity simultaneously.  

With the continuous observation of these objects and the increasing amount of data coming to Earth each day, there is a 
critical need for a systematic pipeline to explore the datasets and extract important information from them. This 
invaluable information will be utilized to provide insights about the diversity of exoplanets and brown dwarfs' 
atmospheric compositions and will help facilitate the long-term analysis of this data in research. `TelescopeML`
is an ML Python package with Sphinx-ed user-friendly documentation that provides both trained ML models and ML tools 
for interpreting observational data captured by telescopes.






# Functionality and Key Features
`TelescopeML` is a Python package comprising a series of modules, each equipped with specialized machine learning and 
statistical capabilities for conducting Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) or Machine Learning (ML) training on datasets 
captured from the atmospheres of extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs. The tasks executed by the `TelescopeML` modules are 
outlined below and visualized in following Figure:

- **DeepBuilder module**: Specify training and target features, normalize/scale datasets, and pass them to the ML training phase.
- **DeepTrainer module**: Create an ML model, train the model with the training examples, and utilize hyperparameters.
- **Predictor module**: Process the observational datasets and deploy the trained ML model to predict atmospheric parameters such as gravity and temperature.
- **StatVisAnalyzer module**: Explore and process the synthetic datasets (or the training examples) and provide functions for statistical analysis.

![TelescopeML main modules to manipulate the training example, build the ML model, train and tune it, and ultimately 
extract the target features from the observational data.](TelescopeML_modules.pdf){height="600pt"}


# Documentation


`TelescopeML` is available and being maintained as a GitHub repository at
[github.com/EhsanGharibNezhad/TelescopeML](https://github.com/EhsanGharibNezhad/TelescopeML). Online 
documentation is hosted with _Sphinx_ using _ReadtheDocs_ tools and includes several instructions and tutorials 
as follows: 

- **Main page**: [ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/)
- **Installation**: [ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/installation.html](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/installation.html)
- **Tutorials and examples**: [ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/tutorials.html](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/tutorials.html)
- **The code**: [ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/code.html](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/code.html)
- **ML Concepts**: [ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/knowledgebase.html](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/knowledgebase.html)


#  Users  and Future Developments

Astrophysicists with no prior machine learning knowledge can deploy the `TelescopeML` package and download the 
pre-trained ML or CNN models to interpret their observational data. In this scenario, pre-trained ML models, 
as well as the PyPI package, can be installed and deployed following the online instructions. Tutorials in the 
Sphinx documentation include examples for testing the code and also serve as a starting point. For this purpose, 
a basic knowledge of Python programming is required to install the code, run the tutorials, deploy the modules, 
and extract astronomical features from the datasets. The necessary machine learning background and a detailed 
guide for package installation, along with links to further Python details, are provided to help understand 
the steps and outputs.

Astrophysicists with machine learning expertise and data scientists can also benefit from this package by 
developing and fine-tuning the modules and pre-trained models to accommodate more complex datasets from 
various telescopes. This effort could also involve the utilization of new ML and deep learning algorithms, 
adding new capabilities such as feature engineering methods, and further optimization of hyperparameters 
using different and more efficient statistical techniques. The ultimate outcome from these two groups would 
be the creation of more advanced models with higher performance and robustness, as well as the extension of 
the package to apply to a wider range of telescope datasets.



# Acknowledgements
Ask the team if they want to add any grant!!!! 
Ask Natasha for the Grant!!
EGN and GN would like to thank OSTEM internships and funding through the NASA with contract number 80NSSC22DA010.
EGN acknowledges ChatGPT 3.5 for proofreading some of the functions and providing helpful suggestions. 

# References
