---
title: '`telescopeML` Python Package: Deep Convolutional Neural Networks and Machine Learning Models for Analyzing 
Stellar and Exoplanetary Telescope Spectra'
tags:
  - Python
  - Astronomy
  - Exoplanets
  - Brown dwarfs
  - Spectroscopy
  - Atmospheric retrieval
  - Atmospheric models
  - Machine learning
  - Convolutional Neural Network
  - Telescope
authors:
  - name: Ehsan (Sam) Gharib-Nezhad
    orcid: 0000-0002-4088-7262
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Natasha E. Batalha
    orcid: 0000-0003-1240-6844 
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Hamed Valizadegan
    orcid: (Ask Hamed to fix this!)
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Miguel J. S. Martinho
    orcid: 0000-0002-2188-0807
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Gopal Nookula 
    orcid: (Ask Gopal to fix this!)
    affiliation: "5"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Science and Astrobiology Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, 94035 USA
    index: 1
  - name: Bay Area Environmental Research Institute, CA, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Universities Space Research Association (USRA), Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
    index: 3
  - name: Intelligent Systems Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
    index: 4
  - name: (Hey Gopal- please complete this) University of California, Riverside
    index: 5

date: 020 October 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

aas-doi: LINK OF ApJ PAPER
aas-journal: The Astrophysical Journal 

--- 

# Statement of Need

We are on the verge of a revolutionary era in space exploration, thanks to advancements in ground- and space-based 
telescopes, such as the James Webb. These remarkable instruments collect an enormous amount of data from extrasolar 
atmospheres. Without an accurate interpretation of this data, the main objective of the space missions will not be 
fully accomplished. Different analytical and statistical methods, such as the chi-test and Bayesian statistics, 
are used in the context of forward- and retrieval-radiative transfer modeling to interpret these datasets and extract 
crucial information, such as atmospheric temperature, metallicity, Carbon-to-Oxygen ratio, and surface gravity. 
These atmospheric models rely on the synthetic training datasets generated by simulating the physics and chemistry 
of these atmospheres for a wide range of thermal structures and compositions. With the continuous observation of 
these objects and the increasing amount of data coming to Earth each day, there is a critical need for a systematic 
pipeline to explore the datasets and extract important information from them. This invaluable information will be 
utilized to provide insights about the diversity of exoplanets and brown dwarfs' atmospheric compositions and will 
help facilitate the long-term analysis of this data in research. `TelescopeML` is an ML Python package with a 
Sphinx-ed user-friendly tutorial and PyPI package that provide both trained ML models and ML tools  for interpreting
observational data captured by telescopes. 

# Functionality and Key Features

`TelescopeML` is a Python package comprising a series of modules, each equipped with specialized machine learning and 
statistical capabilities for conducting Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) or Machine Learning (ML) training on 
datasets captured from the atmospheres of extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs. The tasks executed by the TelescopeML 
modules are outlined below and visualized in Figure \autoref{fig:TelescopeML_modules}:

    - _StatVisAnalyzer_: Explore and process the synthetic datasets (or the training examples).
    - _DeepBuilder_: Specify training and target features, normalize/scale datasets, and construct a CNN model.
    - _DeepTrainer_: Create an ML model, train the model with the training examples, and utilize hyperparameters.
    - _Predictor_: Train the module using specified hyperparameters.

![TelescopeML main modules to manipulate the training example, build the ML model, train and tune it, and ultimately 
extract the target features from the observational data.\label{fig:TelescopeML_modules}](TelescopeML_modules.png){height="9pt"}


# Documentation


``TelescopeML`` is available and being maintained as a github repository at
[github.com/EhsanGharibNezhad/TelescopeML](https://github.com/EhsanGharibNezhad/TelescopeML);
documentation is available on
[ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/). 

#  Users  and Future Developments

Astrophysicists with no prior machine learning knowledge can deploy the TelescopeML package and download the pre-trained 
ML or CNN models to interpret their observational data. In this scenario, pre-trained machine learning (ML) models, 
as well as the PyPI package, can be installed and deployed. Tutorials in the Sphinx documentation include examples for 
testing the code and also serve as a starting point. For this purpose, a basic knowledge of Python programming is required 
to handle the code and extract astronomical features from the datasets. The necessary machine learning background and a 
detailed guide for package installation, along with links to further Python details, are provided to help understand the 
steps and outputs.

Astrophysicists with machine learning expertise and data scientists can also benefit from this package by developing and 
fine-tuning the modules and pre-trained models to accommodate more complex datasets from various telescopes. This effort 
could also involve the utilization of new ML and deep learning algorithms, the application of new feature engineering 
methods, and further optimization of hyperparameters using different and more efficient statistical techniques. The ultimate 
outcome from these two groups would be the creation of more advanced models with higher accuracy and robustness.


# Acknowledgements
(Ask Natasha for the grant number for the brown dwarfs)
E. Gharib-Nezhad expresses gratitude to the developers of many open source Python packages used by `TelescopeML`, ...

# References
