joss/paper.md, before:

---
title: '`telescopeML` Python Package: Deep Convolutional Neural Networks and Machine Learning Models for Analyzing Stellar and Exoplanetary Telescope Spectra'
tags:
  - Python
  - astronomy
  - exoplanets
  - spectroscopy
  - atmospheric retrieval
  - atmospheric models
authors:
  - name: Ehsan (Sam) Gharib-Nezhad
    orcid: 0000-0002-4088-7262
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Natasha E. Batalha
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Hamed Valizadegan
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Miguel J. S. Martinho
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Gopal Nookula 
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "5"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Science and Astrobiology Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
    index: 1
  - name: Bay Area Environmental Research Institute, CA, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Universities Space Research Association (USRA), Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
    index: 3
  - name: Intelligent Systems Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
    index: 4
  - name: (Hey Gopal- please complete this) University of California, Riverside
    index: 5

date: 020 October 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

aas-doi: LINK OF ApJ PAPER
aas-journal: The Astrophysical Journal 

--- 

# Summary


`TelescopeML` 

# Statement of Need


# Future Developments


# Documentation

Documentation for `TelescopeML`, with step-by-step tutorials illustrating research applications, is available at 
[https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/). 

# Similar Tools


# Acknowledgements

E. Gharib-Nezhad expresses gratitude to the developers of many open source Python packages used by `TelescopeML`, ...
Mention grants

# References

Commit message:

- update JOSS paper.md - Added TelescopeML_modules.png figure

joss/paper.md, after:

---
title: '`telescopeML` Python Package: Deep Convolutional Neural Networks and Machine Learning Models for Analyzing Stellar and Exoplanetary Telescope Spectra'
tags:
  - Python
  - astronomy
  - exoplanets
  - brown dwarfs
  - spectroscopy
  - atmospheric retrieval
  - atmospheric models
authors:
  - name: Ehsan (Sam) Gharib-Nezhad
    orcid: 0000-0002-4088-7262
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Natasha E. Batalha
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "1"
  - name: Hamed Valizadegan
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Miguel J. S. Martinho
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Gopal Nookula 
    orcid: 
    affiliation: "5"
affiliations:
  - name: Space Science and Astrobiology Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
    index: 1
  - name: Bay Area Environmental Research Institute, CA, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Universities Space Research Association (USRA), Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
    index: 3
  - name: Intelligent Systems Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
    index: 4
  - name: (Hey Gopal- please complete this) University of California, Riverside
    index: 5

date: 020 October 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

aas-doi: LINK OF ApJ PAPER
aas-journal: The Astrophysical Journal 

--- 

# Summary


`TelescopeML` is a python library consists of a set of modules each with specific machine learning or statistical 
function to perform Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Machine Learning (ML) trainings on telescope datasets 
detected from atmospheres of  extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs. Here is the list of tasks that `TelescopeML` perform:
    * Explore and Process the synthetic datasets (or the training examples)
    * _DeepBuilder_: Build CNN model
    * _DeepTrainer_: Train the module using any given hyperparameters
    * _Predictor_: Train the module using any given hyperparameters


![TelescopeML main modules to manipulate the training example, build the ML model, train and tune it, and ultimately 
extract the target features from the observational data\label{fig:modules}](TelescopeML_modules.png)


# Statement of Need


# Future Developments


# Documentation

Documentation for `TelescopeML`, with step-by-step tutorials illustrating research applications, is available at 
[https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/](https://ehsangharibnezhad.github.io/TelescopeML/). 

# Similar Tools


# Acknowledgements

E. Gharib-Nezhad expresses gratitude to the developers of many open source Python packages used by `TelescopeML`, ...
Mention grants

# References
